#summary Plan for year project of Pershin A. and Makarov N.
#labels Education-Plan

= Introduction =

This page is approximate plan, target of which is developing library for direct support of constructing controllers (automatons) for [Concepts automated control object]s in Eiffel programming language.

= Planned Deliveries =

== 1. Acquantance with theory and Eiffel language ==
   * Reading of Object-Oriented Software Construction by Bertrand Meyer.
   * Reading necessary for understanding articles on htppis.ifmo.ru. (particulary [http://is.ifmo.ru/disser/shopyrin_disser.pdf Stool], [http://is.ifmo.ru/papers/anaumov LOCOL])
   * Reading and understanding automaton programming book by Nadia Polikarpova and Anatoly Shalyto.
   * Meeting with Dmitry Kochelaev in SPbSU ITMO to discuss project.

  Date: maybe end of session, maybe earlier (depends on difficulty of session)

== 2. Writing program on Eiffel in Eiffel Studio ==
   * Program will be something like simple Graph class (based on adjancency matrix or adjancency lists) and client that uses this class(for instance Dijkstra's algorithm).
   * Get more close relationships with EiffelStudio -)
   * Sending it to Nadya for checking.

  Date: end of session/start of Feb'09

== 3. Designing of library interface ==
   * Maybe some UML Diagrams?).
   * Examples of library's client classes (i.e. example code that uses our library in some not trivial object).
   * Team collaboration with Dmitry.

  Date: end of Feb'09/start of Mar'09

== 4. Library coding ==
   * No comments, it would be trivial, we hope.
   * Commiting all code to svn with Nadya's regular reviews.

  Date: end of Mar'09

== 5. Preparing documentation for Shalyto ==
  * TeX and LaTeX RTFM and iteration process with Shalyto.
  Date: end of Jun'09

== 6. Preparing user documentation ==
   * It would be simultaneous with Shalyto's documentation stage(i.e. previous).
   * Doing some simple(or maybe complicated) site for our project.
  Date: end of Apr'09

== 7. PROFIT ==
   * Decision whether our project is good and whether we take it on our bachelor's degree work.

= In addition =
Critisism are welcome in comments.